Original Editor - Lucinda hampton

Top Contributors - Lucinda hampton , Oyemi Sillo and Aminat Abolade

Contents

Introduction [ edit | edit source ]

The fundamental requirement for any endurance sport is the ability to sustain a submaximal work rate for a prolonged period. Examples include cycling, swimming, rowing, cross-country skiing etc. The ability to compete strongly in endurance events is influenced by our physical fitness and psychological strengths

Types of Endurance Exercise [ edit | edit source ]

Endurance exercise means a general ability to do any kind of physical activity that increases your heart rate above 50% of your maximum. It can be divided into general endurance and specific endurance.

New Insights [ edit | edit source ]

The classical view of training specificity is that: individuals who train by exercising for a long time will develop better oxygen delivery to muscle and endurance capacity; those who work against a heavy load will get bigger and stronger muscles.

Recent work using high-intensity interval training (HIIT) to increase endurance and low-load resistance training to failure to increase muscle size and strength have challenged the classical view of training specificity. [3]

HIIT

Adaptations in Skeletal Muscle [ edit | edit source ]

Endurance training leads to adaptations in both the cardiovascular and musculoskeletal system that supports an overall increase in exercise capacity and performance.

The local adaptations in skeletal muscle, such as increased mitochondrial biogenesis and capillary density, aid in the body’s ability to transport and use oxygen to generate energy and therefore delay the onset of muscle fatigue during prolonged aerobic performance. The mitochondrion is the main organelle for energy production through the generation of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) via the electron transport system. [3]

Cardiovascular Adaptations [ edit | edit source ]

Aerobic exercise training leads to cardiovascular changes that markedly increase aerobic power and lead to improved endurance performance. The functionally most important adaptation is the improvement in maximal cardiac output which is the result of an enlargement in cardiac dimension, improved contractility, and an increase in blood volume, allowing for greater filling of the ventricles and a consequent larger stroke volume. In parallel with the greater maximal cardiac output, the perfusion capacity of the muscle is increased, permitting for greater oxygen delivery. To accommodate the higher aerobic demands and perfusion levels, arteries , arterioles, and capillaries adapt in structure and number. The diameters of the larger conduit and resistance arteries are increased minimizing resistance to flow [5] .

Endurance Exercise Performance in Ageing [ edit | edit source ]

Peak endurance performance is maintained until ∼35 years of age, followed by modest decreases until 50–60 years of age, with progressively steeper declines thereafter. Among the three main physiological determinants of endurance exercise performance (i.e. VO2 max, lactate threshold and exercise economy), a progressive reduction in VO2 max appears to be the primary mechanism associated with declines in endurance performance with ageing .

Masters endurance athletes are capable of remarkable athletic and physiological functional performance, thereby representing a uniquely positive example of ‘exceptional ageing’. Nevertheless, endurance exercise performance decreases during middle-age and declines at an even more rapid rate in older age. [7]

Image: Antonio Molinari (born 13 February 1967) World Masters Mountain Running Championships 2021, a course of 7.4 kilometres involving a climb of 775 metres

The Role of Supplements [ edit | edit source ]

The world of endurance nutrition is continually evolving and the commercial supplement industry is ever-changing. Elite athletes, after maximising training adaptations, often look to gain marginal benefits with supplements. It is recommended that athletes obtain nutrition from whole foods. However athletes often look to supplements. Below summarises the key recommendations for macronutrients, hydration, and supplements.

Athletes commonly take supplements , and a few supplements may have merit in the endurance world.

References [ edit | edit source ]