Original Editor - Lucinda hampton

Top Contributors - Lucinda hampton , Anne Dixie Lim , Mohit Chand , Aminat Abolade and Ewa Jaraczewska

Contents

Introduction [ edit | edit source ]

Flexibility is the ability of muscles, joints, and tissues to move through an unrestricted, pain-free range of motion. It involves the ability of these structures to stretch, extend, and contract without restriction, allowing for optimal movement. While changes vary from person to person, a minimum is necessary to maintain joint health and conditioning. Many variables, including genetics, age, activity level, and past injury history, can affect the loss of normal joint function. The movement of the tissues surrounding the joint, muscles, ligaments, tendons, joint capsules, and skin affects a range of motion.

Lack of stretching, especially when combined with activity, can lead to fatigue because of the shortening of tissues over time. [1]

Assessment [ edit | edit source ]

Depending on the specific joints or muscle groups, you can assess flexibility using various methods. Here are some common techniques for assessing flexibility. Some of the test-retest reliability of these tests is consistently high, but validity ranges from low to moderate depending on the criterion used. [2]

Importance of Flexibility [ edit | edit source ]

Inadequate flexibility will have a negative effect on the body in 3 significant ways:

Exercise Recommendations [ edit | edit source ]

Several types of exercises can be done to enhance flexibility, including the following:

Dynamic VS Static Stretches [ edit | edit source ]

When preparing the muscles for action, e.g. swimming or running, you need to prepare your muscles with warm-ups that typically include stretching. So the question arises which gives better results static or dynamic stretches?

The stretching portion traditionally incorporated static stretching. However, there are a myriad of studies demonstrating static stretch-induced performance impairments. More recently, many articles have found no detrimental effects associated with prior static stretching. [6]

Older People [ edit | edit source ]

Flexibility training interventions in older adults are often effective at increasing joint range of motion in various joints, and various functional outcomes can be improved. However, older adults are not overly concerned with the high-performance benefits of increased flexibility. They are more focused on being safely active and safely performing activities of daily living . Injury and fall prevention are also common motives for recommending flexibility programs to older adults . Flexibility training may enhance postural stability and balance when combined with resistance training . [10] (See also Physical Activity in Older Adults )

While there is a lack of evidence to recommend stretching routines outside of a rehabilitative context, there is no additional health or functional risk of including flexibility exercises. In light of increases in functional outcomes achieved by other exercise modes ( balance , aerobic exercise, and strengthening exercises), stretching exercises can be included as an adjunct to the above. Still, the current literature indicates that it would add little to the functional benefits of the other exercise modes. [10]

Low Back Pain [ edit | edit source ]

Flexibility exercises are often used in exercise rehabilitation programmes as they are effective at reducing the pain associated with non-specific chronic low back pain . (See also Interventions for LBP )

Stretching the soft tissues in the back, legs and buttock, e.g. hamstrings , erector muscles of the spine and hip flexor muscles, ligaments and tendon s can help to mobilise the spine, and an increase in the range of motion of the spine can reduce back pain. This is because stretching can improve the flexibility of the muscle tendons and ligaments in the back, which is important to increase the range of motion of the joints. This improved range of motion assists with patients’ movement and ability to complete activities of daily living, as most everyday tasks, such as lifting and bending, require trunk flexion, which involves a complex movement combining lumbar and hip motion. [11]

Conclusion [ edit | edit source ]

Flexibility exercises are recommended as part of a complete exercise program, along with aerobic exercise , resistance training , and neuromotor exercise training.

References [ edit | edit source ]