Contents

Introduction [ edit | edit source ]

Body mechanics is a term used to describe the ways we move as we go about our daily lives. It includes how we hold our bodies when we sit, stand, lift, carry, bend, and sleep. Poor body mechanics are often the cause of back problems. When we don't move correctly and safely, the spine is subjected to abnormal stresses that over time can lead to degeneration of spinal structures like discs and joints, injury, and unnecessary wear and tear. That is why it is so important to learn the principles of proper body mechanics [1] .

Posture [ edit | edit source ]

Good body mechanics are based on good posture [read link].

Good posture means the spine is in a "neutral" position - not too rounded forward and not arched back too far.

“Neutral” Postures

Sitting

Whether sitting at a desk or at home watching television, good body mechanics are still important to keep in mind. For deskwork, consider investing in an ergonomically enhanced chair.

Good sitting:

Working with Wheelchair/seated clients Clients [ edit | edit source ]

In General:

Injury Prevention Tips [ edit | edit source ]

• Design work/tasks that facilitate variety. • During all loading tasks, avoid a fully flexed spine and rotate the trunk using the hips. • During lifting, choose a posture to minimize the reaction torque on the low back (stoop, squat, etc), but keep the external load close to the body. • Consider the transmissible vector: direct external forces through the low back when pulling on a door handle, vacuuming, etc. • Use techniques that minimize the actual weight of the load being handled. • Allow time for the disc nucleus to “equilibrate,” ligaments to regain stiffness, and stress on the annulus to equalize after prolonged flexion, and do not immediately perform strenuous exertions. • Avoid lifting or spine bending shortly after rising from bed • Pre-stress and stabilize the back even during light tasks. • Avoid twisting and simultaneous generation of high twisting torques. • Use momentum when lifting awkwardly placed light loads. • Avoid prolonged sitting • Consider the best rest break strategies based on your job demands. • Practice joint-conserving kinematic movement patterns. • Maintain a reasonable level of fitness.

Physiotherapy [ edit | edit source ]

Educate clients on proper body mechanics (table R, benefits of good posture)

References [ edit | edit source ]