Contents

Course Description [ edit | edit source ]

This project forms part of the "Neuromotor Function II" course in the first year of the two year Master of Science in Physical Therapy (MScPT) program at Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada . Students will work in groups of 3 to 5 to create a patient case study within the Physiopedia online platform using the Physiopedia Case Study framework .

Course Instructor [ edit | edit source ]

Kathleen Norman 2017

Vince DePaul 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021

Afolasade Fakolade 2021, 2022

Instructions to Students [ edit | edit source ]

Full instructions are provided to students on a document distributed through the Queen's Learning Management System (OnQ). The key points of these instructions are as follows:

Search around Physiopedia for pages that relate to the content of the course. Within any relevant pages you find, follow the links and citations to develop a greater sense of their quality and quantity. Notice that inter-relatedness is a highly valuable feature of Physiopedia, optimized if the links and citations add real value.

In keeping with the course objectives, the creation of a page must be related to a neurological condition that affects adults and causes movement problems. Within the case study, you will describe and link to physiopedia pages related to a specific condition(s), information and links to relevant assessments and interventions that relate to the case you have developed.

Your content should be accurate, evidence-based, and have appropriate and accurate inclusion of hyperlinks and citations. The hyperlinks and citations should add knowledge value to your contributions. Your content should have absolutely zero spelling errors, zero grammar errors, zero breaches of academic integrity, and zero copyright violations. If you edit existing pages, your contributions should mesh well with the existing content on that page and be respectful of prior contributors.

Incorporate and include links to references and resources to support the information you are including in your case. This should include original research (including systematic reviews), as well as other online resources that you may find.  You are NOT permitted to cite the course textbook or any other textbook that is not freely accessible online to the world. If you take your inspiration for this assignment from the textbook chapters, you should take a look at what references they cite (at the back of each chapter) and look them up online. If relevant, see if you can find anything more current.

To get you started you can find help on the Guide to taking part in a student project .

NOTE: In 2017 and 2018, students were asked to create or edit 1 to 3 pages on a specific condition, treatment or assessment (see some examples below).  This year (2019), students will develop a case study for their Physiopedia contribution.  For all the content that has been developed through this project please visit the Queen's University Neuromotor Function Project Category

Articles - 2017 [ edit | edit source ]

Articles - 2018 [ edit | edit source ]

Articles - 2019 [ edit | edit source ]

Articles - 2020 [ edit | edit source ]

Articles - 2021 [ edit | edit source ]

Articles-2022 [ edit | edit source ]

Articles-2023 [ edit | edit source ]