Original Editor - Manisha Shrestha

Contents

Introduction [ edit | edit source ]

Strength training (also known as resistance  exercise) increases muscle strength by making muscles work against a weight or force. Resistance exercise is considered a form of anaerobic exercise. [1]

Principles of Strength Training [ edit | edit source ]

The basic principles of a strength training programme are: [2]

Equipment of Strength Training [ edit | edit source ]

Different types of strength training include: [3]

Designing a Strength (Resistance) Program [ edit | edit source ]

It is important to pay attention to safety and form in order to reduce the risk of injury. When planning a protocol, the main things to consider are: [4]

6. Progression of strength training should be tailored to each individual's level of exertion, as indicated by the Rate of Perceived Exertion (RPE) scale and their one-rep max. As individuals become stronger, they should progressively increase the weight used for their exercises. Another aspect of progression involves adjusting the speed of the exercises. Slowing down the pace of an exercise can heighten its difficulty. Other factors such as range of motion, time under tension, and torque are considered when advancing exercises.

Designing a strength (resistance) training program requires careful considerations and specific planning. The best strength training program is one tailored to personal goals. Below are the 4 types of resistance programs.

Strength

Objective: Achieve gains in muscular strength, focusing on both concentric and eccentric contractions. "Develop overall muscle strength and improve performance in activities requiring force production. Training should emphasize agendas that merge maximal strength and speed." [8]

Design Considerations:  Incorporate compound exercises targeting major muscle groups, such as squats, deadlifts, bench presses, and rows. "Training heavy with a weight that can only be done for 6 or less reps (greater than or equal to 85% of 1 rep max) for 2-6 sets resting 2-5 minutes between each set." [8]

Benefits: "Staying consistent with a strength program leads to increased bone strength, endurance, strength, and muscle tone. Balance and coordination will improve, as will a decrease in the risk of injury. Thus, making activities of daily living easier." [9] ​

Power

Objective: To develop explosiveness and speed, enhance the ability to generate maximal force in minimal time, crucial for activities requiring quick movements, such as sprinting, jumping, and throwing.

Design Considerations: "Single effort lifts should be 80-90% of 1RM with 1-2 reps, while multiple effort lifts should be 75-85% of 1RM, with 3-5 reps. Both should be 3-5 sets with 2–5-minute rest period between sets." [8] "When training for power, it is important to perform exercises with a relatively high speed, a load, and explosive intent." [10]

Benefits: Enhances explosive power and speed. Improves neuromuscular coordination and motor unit recruitment. "Can complement other training programs to enhance overall athletic performance that can translate to functional activities in real life." [8]

Hypertrophy

Objective: Promote muscle growth and increase muscle size (hypertrophy) through resistance training in a specific way. Focusing on looking "aesthetic.

Design considerations: "Incorporate moderate to high volume training with moderate loads 67-85% of 1RM in sets of 3-6 and doing 6-12 reps while resting 30-90 seconds between sets." [8] Focus on compound exercises that engage the core. Isolation exercise should be included to target specific muscle groups such as biceps, triceps, and shoulder. In order to maximize hypertrophy gains, progressive overload is always encouraged, so increasing weight, reps, sets or even decreasing rest time.

Benefits: "Better mobility and functional capacity, increased strength, muscle, and bone mass, improved quality of life factors, reduced body fat, increased metabolic rate, lower blood pressure and cardiovascular strain during physical activity, improved blood lipid profile, and lower risk of type II diabetes." [11]

Muscular Endurance

Objective: Enhance muscular endurance and stamina through extended exercise duration and resistance to fatigue. Improve cardiovascular fitness and aerobic capacity, which are essential for activities that require prolonged efforts.

Design considerations: "To promote muscular endurance, incorporate resistance exercises with high repetition and low-to-moderate load. Training with weight that is less than or equal to 67% of 1RM, 2-3 sets, in a rep range of 12 or more, and resting 30 seconds or less between sets." [8]

Benefits: "Endurance training leads to adaptations in both the musculoskeletal system and cardiovascular systems, which contributes to an overall improvement in performance and exercise capacity." [12] Can also reduce the risk of overuse injuries caused by repetitive movements.

Effects of Strength Training [ edit | edit source ]

Strength training stimulates a variety of positive neuromuscular adaptations that enhance both physical and mental health. Physical and mental health benefits that can be achieved through resistance training include:

Strength Exercises and Chronic Diseases [ edit | edit source ]

People with Chronic disease can all benefit from exercise eg diabetes, asthma, metabolic syndrome , cardiovascular disease , low back pain , arthritis , joint pain, depression, ( COPD ).

Obesity

Cardiovascular Disease (CVD)

Type 2 Diabetes

Cancer

Strength and the Older Population [ edit | edit source ]

With an increase in age, there comes various co-morbidities and having frailty.

Repetition Maximum for Weight Training [ edit | edit source ]

A repetition maximum (RM) is the most weight a person can lift for a defined number of exercise movements.

One Repetition Maximum (1RM) is defined as the maximal weight an individual can lift for only one repetition with correct technique.

It can be either calculated directly using maximal testing or indirectly using submaximal estimation methods.

If you just managed to lift 100 kg for five reps, you’d calculate your 1RM like this:

How to Safely Test 1RM

While 1RM is a very useful tool, it does have limitations. Measuring your 1RM is not simply a matter of grabbing the biggest weight and getting a person to perform a rep. By definition, you will be stressing this muscle to its maximum and placing person at risk of an injury if you don't do it correctly. You need to prepare to do it properly. For e.g.

Resources [ edit | edit source ]

Related Pages [ edit | edit source ]

References [ edit | edit source ]