Three Types of Exercise Can Improve Your Health and Physical Ability | National Institute on Aging
Source: https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/exercise-and-physical-activity/three-types-exercise-can-improve-your-health-and-physical
License: Public domain (US federal government work)
Fetched: 2026-07-12
======================================================================

Three Types of Exercise Can Improve Your Health and Physical Ability

Español

Read and share this infographic
about different types of exercise.

Most people tend to focus on one type of exercise or activity and think they’re doing enough. Research has shown that it’s important to get all three types: aerobic, muscle-strengthening, and balance.
Doing one type of exercise can help improve your ability to do the others, and variety helps reduce boredom and risk of injury. There are also activities that incorporate multiple types of exercise, such as yoga, dancing, or water aerobics.
For workout videos and examples of how to do some of the exercises listed below, visit
NIA’s YouTube channel
. No matter your age, you can find activities that meet your fitness level and needs and help
improve your overall health
!

Aerobic exercises for older adults

Sometimes referred to as endurance or cardio, aerobic physical activity involves moving the body’s large muscles for extended periods of time. This requires the lungs to move more air and the heart to pump more blood and deliver it to the working muscles. Aerobic physical activity increases your breathing and heart rate.
Being physically active in this way — with consistency over time — will improve your endurance and the health of your lungs,
heart
, and circulatory system. It can also help lower the risk of many diseases that are common in older adults, such as
diabetes
, certain cancers, and heart disease.
Gradually build up to at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity (such as brisk walking) each week. If
exercising with chronic condition
s makes it hard to get the recommended amount of activity, talk with your doctor about what you can do. In general, it’s a good idea to be as physically active as you can — even light-intensity movement can be beneficial. Try to be active throughout your day and avoid sitting for long periods of time.
Examples of moderate-intensity activities that build endurance include:
Yard work, such as raking leaves or pushing a lawnmower
Housework, such as mopping or vacuuming
Dancing
Swimming
Bicycling
Climbing stairs or hills
Playing pickleball
Safety tips
Listen to your body. Aerobic activities should not cause dizziness, chest pain or pressure, or nausea.
Do a little light activity, such as easy walking, before and after your aerobic activities to warm up and cool down.
Be sure to drink water when doing any activity that makes you sweat. If your doctor has told you to limit your fluids, be sure to check before increasing the amount of fluid you drink while exercising.
If you are going to be
exercising outdoors
, be aware of the weather and your surroundings.
To prevent injuries, use safety equipment, such as a helmet when
bicycling
, and
proper exercise shoes and clothes
.
Talk with your doctor
if you are unsure about a particular activity.

Quick tip: Test your exercise intensity

When you’re being active, try talking. If you’re breathing hard but can still have a conversation easily, it’s likely moderate-intensity activity. If you can only say a few words before you have to take a breath, it’s vigorous-intensity activity, such as running or jogging. Building up to 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity activity or doing a combination of both moderate- and vigorous-activity can also count toward your aerobic exercise goal.

Muscle-strengthening exercises for older adults

Muscle-strengthening exercises, sometimes called strength training or resistance training, are activities that require the muscles to contract, often to lift a heavy object against the pull of gravity. Gradual increases in the amount of weight, number of sets or repetitions, or the number of days a week of exercise will result in stronger muscles.
Muscle-strengthening activities improve physical function and can help you stay independent and make it easier to perform everyday activities, such as getting up from a chair, climbing stairs, and carrying groceries. This type of exercise is also key to maintaining existing strength, slowing the loss of muscle mass, and helping to
prevent falls and fall-related injuries
.
Try doing muscle-strengthening activities at least two days per week to work the major muscle groups of the body (muscles of the legs, hips, chest, back, abdomen, shoulders, and arms), but avoid working the same muscle group on any two days in a row to allow for muscle recovery between sessions.
The exercises should involve at least a moderate level of intensity or effort and be performed to the point at which it would be difficult to do another repetition. One set of eight to 12 repetitions of each exercise is effective, although two or three sets may be more effective. If you are a beginner, try exercises without weights or resistance bands (stretchy elastic bands that come in varying strengths) until you are comfortable with the movements.
Examples of muscle-strengthening activities include:
Using resistance bands, weight machines, or hand-held weights
Lifting your body weight, with exercises such as arm circles, leg raises, pushups, pullups, planks, squats, or lunges
Carrying heavy items, such as groceries
Gardening, which may require digging and lifting
Safety tips
Listen to your body. Overdoing muscle-strengthening exercises can cause exhaustion, sore joints, and muscle pain or injury.
Warm up for muscle-strengthening activity by doing exercises with less weight.
Don’t hold your breath during strength exercises — breathe out during the effort and breathe in as you relax.
Avoid “locking” your arm and leg joints in a straight position.
If you are unsure about doing a particular movement, seek guidance from your doctor or physical therapist.
Consider scheduling a session or two with a personal trainer or look for a group class at a local gym, recreation center, or senior center to learn proper form. Free
online videos demonstrating specific strength exercises
can also help.

Flexibility

Flexibility is the ability of a joint to move through the full range of motion.
Stretching
can help maintain and improve flexibility. Moving more freely will also make it easier for you to exercise and perform activities of daily life, such as reaching down to tie your shoes or unloading the dishwasher. Stretch when your muscles are warmed up and after endurance or strength exercises, remember to breathe, and don’t stretch so far that it hurts.

Balance exercises for older adults

Balance involves maintaining the body’s stability while still or in motion. As with muscle-strengthening exercises, balance exercises help to
prevent falls and fall-related injuries
. Aim for about three sessions of balance exercises a week.
Examples of balance exercises include:
Tai chi
(a “moving meditation” that involves shifting the body slowly, gently, and precisely, while breathing deeply)
Yoga
Standing on one foot
The heel-to-toe walk
The balance walk
Walking backward or sideways
Practicing standing from a sitting position
Using a wobble board
Safety tips
Listen to your body. If you feel unsteady, take action to steady yourself.
Go slowly and mindfully to prevent falling.
If you are unsure about doing a particular movement, seek guidance from your doctor or physical therapist.
Have a sturdy chair, person, or wall nearby to hold onto for support.
Wear comfortable, stable footwear or go barefoot to have grip on the floor or mat.

Combining the three types of physical activity

Older adults need a mix of physical activities to stay healthy. As part of your weekly activity, include a combination of aerobic, muscle-strengthening, and balance activities.
You can also combine more than one type of exercise into the same exercise session. Activities such as dancing, yoga, tai chi, gardening, or sports can also be considered a combination because they often incorporate multiple types of physical activity.

You may also be interested in
Finding
tips for getting and staying active as you age
Reading about
health benefits of exercise
Learning about
exercising with chronic conditions

For more information

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
800-232-4636
cdcinfo@cdc.gov
www.cdc.gov

MedlinePlus
National Library of Medicine
www.medlineplus.gov

Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (ODPHP)
240-453-8280
odphpinfo@hhs.gov
https://odphp.health.gov

National Council on Aging

571-527-3900
www.ncoa.org

SilverSneakers
866-584-7389
www.silversneakers.com

YMCA
800-872-9622
www.ymca.net

This content is provided by the NIH National Institute on Aging (NIA). NIA scientists and other experts review this content to ensure it is accurate and up to date.

Content reviewed:

January 14, 2025